# Research Question
Using historical daily data on maximum and minimum temperatures, along with relative humidity data, from October through May, can I accurately estimate the amount of total snowfall (in centimeters) that will occur on a given day in those months using a machine learning model? The analysis excludes summer months (June through September) due to their historically negligible snowfall patterns.

# Background and Prior Work
As a Mediterranean climate, California’s annual precipitation is largely restricted to a short season from November through March and is characterized by highly variable annual precipitation. The extreme variability in precipitation can be partially attributed to the presence or absence of atmospheric rivers which are bands of water vapor that form over the tropics and are responsible for as much as 50% of California’s annual precipitation1. As climate change progresses, it is projected that California will experience an even greater whiplash between years of extreme wetness and years of extreme dryness2. Although precipitation in general is important to consider, it is actually snowfall that is most important in terms of California’s water supply because it serves as a natural form of water storage and supplies approximately a third of California’s water3. The amount of snowfall that California receives has a huge impact on agriculture, tourism, hydroelectric power generation, and of course our water supply. As of now, it is difficult to accurately predict how much snowfall will occur on a given day. Increasing the accuracy with which snowfall predictions can be made would be a boon for water management which could mitigate some of the destructive impacts of increasingly severe droughts. Weather factors that could aid in snowfall forecasting are humidity which has been shown to have a positive relationship with snowfall and temperature which has been shown to have a negative relationship with snowfall, as these two factors are said to be the most vital variables when predicting snowfall4. With these relationships in mind, I wonder if historical data on a day’s relative humidity, maximum air temperature, minimum air temperature, and the resulting amount of snowfall in centimeters could be used to create a model that more accurately predicts the amount of snowfall that will occur. Similar work has previously been conducted in which historical data has been used to try to predict future snowfall. For instance, an analysis was conducted using historical data on annual snowfall and maximum annual snowfall to develop a multiple linear regression model to estimate future snowfall for years 2020 to 2060 in Denver Colorado5. Unsurprisingly, the model predicted that annual snowfall would drastically decline in Denver by 2060. Although a prediction of declining snowfall is consistent with projections of decreases in mean annual snowfall due to climate change, a multiple linear regression model is a somewhat simplistic way to model a phenomenon as variable and non-linear as weather. Furthermore, it is important to understand how much snowfall will occur annually, but it may be even more important to know how much snowfall will occur on a given day. Officials who manage reservoirs in California often have to release water in anticipation of upcoming storms, but have to balance letting enough water out to not cause flooding and letting too much out that it endangers future water supply. An accurate understanding of how much snowfall will occur as a result of a storm would allow officials to better manage the precious water supply. Although a multiple linear regression model is a rather unsophisticated method to predict future snowfall, more sophisticated attempts have also been made to make predictions based on historical data. For example, a long short-term memory recurrent neural network was trained using 20 years of historical winter data that included variables such as maximum temperature, minimum temperature, rainfall, snowfall, and relative humidity to predict snowfall at a weather station6. The paper claims that the model predicted snowfall with a high level of accuracy, but it seems as though the model only predicted the occurrence of snow rather than the amount of snow that fell. It is encouraging to see that a model can predict with accuracy whether snow will occur based on parameters such as maximum temperature, minimum temperature, rainfall, snowfall, and relative humidity but it remains to be seen if I can develop a model that can predict the precise amount of snow that will fall on a day based on the temperature and relative humidity.

1:Dettinger, Michael D., et al. “Atmospheric rivers, floods and the water resources of California.” Water, vol. 3, no. 2, 24 Mar. 2011, pp. 445–478, https://doi.org/10.3390/w3020445.

2:Swain, Daniel L., et al. “Increasing precipitation volatility in twenty-first-century California.” Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, no. 5, 23 Apr. 2018, pp. 427–433, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0140-y.

3:Bland, Alastair. “California Storms Create Paradox: Too Much Water in Reservoirs, Too Soon.” CalMatters, 10 Mar. 2023, calmatters.org/environment/2023/03/california-storm-reservoirs-flooding/.

4:Zhang, Xueting, et al. “Environmental factors influencing snowfall and snowfall prediction in the Tianshan Mountains, Northwest China.” Journal of Arid Land, vol. 11, no. 1, 27 Dec. 2018, pp. 15–28, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40333-018-0110-2.

5:Palkovic, Martin. “Estimating Future Snowfall in Denver, Colorado Using Machine Learning in Python.” Medium, Towards Data Science, 5 June 2022, medium.com/towards-data-science/estimating-future-snowfall-in-denver-colorado-using-machine-learning-in-python-ada88a531001.

6:Sehvish Riyaz , Dr. Ashish Oberoi. Snowfall Prediction Using Artificial Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science and Technology (IJIRCST), Vol-11, no.1, January, 2023,pp. 5-9, doi:10.55524/ijircst.2023.11.1.2.

# Hypothesis
I predict that the total amount of snowfall in centimeters for a given day during the snow season (October through May) will have a negative relationship with both maximum and minimum temperatures, and a positive relationship with relative humidity. I believe that the total amount of snow predicted will be negatively impacted by increasing temperatures, as higher temperatures reduce the likelihood of snowfall. Conversely, I expect estimated snowfall to increase as relative humidity levels increase, as higher humidity levels have been shown to promote more intense snowfall. Additionally, using a specific day's temperatures and humidity data, I will be able to predict the amount of snowfall on that given day using a machine learning model.